Hello, hello, hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English, the show
where you can listen to fascinating
stories and learn weird and wonderful
things about the world at the same
time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today
is part two of our three-part
mini-series on Modern Egypt.
In part one, in case you missed
it, we talked about the Egyptian
Revolution, how Mubarak was toppled,
and how what ultimately came
next wasn’t all that different.
In part three, we will talk about the
murder of the Italian PhD student,
Giulio Regeni, almost certainly at
the hands of the Egyptian police.
And today, in part two, we are
going to talk about Egypt’s plan
to build a new administrative
capital in the middle of the desert.
Is it bold and necessary?
Is it foolish and a waste of money, or
is it simply a way for President Sisi to
make sure he doesn’t end up like Mubarak?
Let’s not waste a minute and find out.
It’s hard to overstate
quite how big Cairo is.
By some measures, it’s the sixth
most populous city in the world,
with over 21 million people.
It’s also one of the world’s most
densely populated cities, with
the Cairo urban area having 10,000
people per kilometre squared.
As a point of reference, this
number for Paris is 3,800
. Cairo is massive, very densely populated,
and with the population of Egypt growing
at almost 2% a year, well, this situation
isn’t going to change any time soon.
Traffic clogs the streets for hours,
air pollution chokes the lungs,
and housing struggles to keep up
with a population that grows by
roughly two million every year.
And while Cairo might be sprawling
and densely populated, most
of the rest of Egypt…isn’t.
99% of the population of Egypt lives
in about 5.5% of the country’s area.
There is a perfectly good reason for this,
of course; most of Egypt is arid desert.
It’s hard to build on, hostile
to live in, and has no water.
The lifeblood of the country is, as
you will know, the river that runs
almost vertically through it: The Nile.
As a quick side note, we have a three-part
mini-series all about the amazing story
of the quest to find the origin of the
Nile; that’s episodes 414 through to 416,
if you haven’t listened to those already.
Anyway, unsurprisingly, population centres
in Egypt all cluster around the Nile.
And Cairo is no exception.
The Nile runs right through it.
But there is a plan to separate
Egyptian centres of population from
the river that has been the lifeblood
of the country for thousands of years.
If you go 45 kilometres east
of Cairo, right out towards the
desert, on the way to the port
city of Suez, you will find it.
In fact, one sign in particular
will not be difficult to spot.
Shooting up into the sky,
like a 21st-century gleaming
obelisk, is The Iconic Tower.
It’s 77 storeys high, making it
the tallest building not just in
Egypt but in the whole of Africa.
It is the centrepiece of a city called
“New Administrative Capital”, a project
so ambitious it’s almost hard to fathom.
60 billion dollars, an entire city
built from scratch in the desert.
The idea for the city was first
unveiled in 2015 at a high-profile
conference in Sharm el-Sheikh.
Its name?
Well, that's a good question.
They hadn’t quite decided on the name
yet, but as a placeholder, it would
be called the New Administrative
Capital, or NAC for short.
The idea was to relocate the government,
ease Cairo’s overcrowding, and project
an image of modernity and control.
Building started in 2016,
first with official government
buildings, offices, and some of
the signature mosques and churches.
There are, as of the time of writing
this episode, almost 50,000 government
workers who have moved into new
offices there, although it’s not
clear how many actually live there.
According to most reports, most
still live in Cairo proper,
and commute out every day.
But this is just the beginning.
By the time the city is completed,
it is slated to go over an area of
950 square kilometres and have space
for up to 8 million residents, almost
half the current population of Cairo.
If you look at the plans, of
course, it looks pretty fantastic:
an artificial river that meanders
through the city, surrounded by a lush
green park projected to be six times
bigger than New York’s Central Park.
Vast mosques, churches, clean
streets, modern schools, a new
airport, even a theme park.
Boasts that it will set a new standard
of what it means to be a “smart city”,
or to quote its brochure, “Experience a
city that seamlessly blends cutting-edge
urban planning, smart designs, and
advanced technologies to ensure the
safety, efficiency, and vitality
of both our cherished residents
and esteemed visitors.” End quote.
If it all sounds too good to be
true, that’s because it is too good
to be true, at least at the moment.
There are posts on social media
from curious tourists who popped in
for a visit but found…nobody there.
Huge wide boulevards, spotless streets,
but no signs of life whatsoever.
Egyptian authorities say that
this is all to be expected.
It’s part of the plan.
Of course, millions of people aren’t going
to flood in at once, but over time, the
population will grow, to an estimated 6 or
7 million by the year 2030, and there will
be capacity for more, up to 8 if required.
If this happens, it will relieve a
huge amount of pressure from Cairo.
The air quality will improve, people
will live in better housing conditions,
they’ll have access to better parks,
schools, hospitals, you name it.
It will be good for people who choose
to stay in Cairo, and it will be
good for those who decide to move.
A win-win.
But sceptics point out that
the motivations for this city
go beyond mere urban planning.
Moving the capital 45 kilometres
from Cairo isn’t just about space;
it’s about security and control.
As we talked about in the last episode,
Cairo was the centre of the 2011
revolution, and Tahrir Square an almost
indestructible monument to civil unrest.
By shifting the government to a
remote desert site, the critics
argue, Sisi is signaling that he
wants to start afresh, away from
the revolutionary energy of Cairo.
It signals a reset, a chance
to leave that chaos behind.
When Sisi won re-election in 2018,
he chose to take his constitutional
oath outside the new parliament
in the NAC, not in Cairo.
He repeated this in 2024, swearing in
for his third term under the desert sky.
This is Egypt’s future, he seemed to say.
Forget Tahrir; power lives here now.
The city’s very design reinforces
this idea, of power and authority.
Wide boulevards and sprawling plazas
dominate the layout, which a cynic
might say have been deliberately
planned to make it easier to put down
any kind of public demonstration.
Narrow streets, like those in Cairo
where protesters once vanished
into alleys or swelled out of
sight, are nowhere to be found.
Crowds would struggle to
gather or hide in the NAC.
That’s if they could get
there in the first place.
Unlike Cairo, where anyone could
flood the streets, the NAC’s
remoteness and planned zones make
it easier to gate off any trouble.
The army can just close the roads,
effectively blocking off the city.
And of course, any trouble is likely
to be noticed and swiftly dealt with
before it has the chance to bubble up.
With 6,000 CCTV cameras spread throughout
the NAC, every corner is watched, every
step tracked, a stark warning that
the state is watching your every move.
Indeed, the entire project,
or rather the company that is
administering the project, is majority
owned by the Egyptian military.
This is a military city.
But it is also President
Sisi’s signature project.
It’s a city to represent his
vision of modern Egypt, and
ensure his political survival.
In 2015, when Sisi unveiled the plan, the
country had endured years of upheaval.
Thousands had been killed in clashes,
tens of thousands more jailed, and the
Muslim Brotherhood outlawed and hunted.
Relocating to the desert, far
from Tahrir’s symbolic pull, lets
him redraw the map of control.
The NAC isn’t just a new address; it’s a
fortress, isolating power from the urban
chaos that fuelled the 2011 protests.
So, there is this criticism, that it is
a cynical ploy to reduce the potential
for future civil unrest and build a city
that makes it a breeze to contain it.
There is also the criticism that
building cities in unnatural places
never works, and this is a fool’s errand.
There are countless examples throughout
history of failed “new cities”, and
indeed, this isn’t Egypt’s first stab
at building a new city in the desert.
Back in the 1970s, President Sadat
had a similar idea, and it seems
that he was not much more imaginative
in his naming than Sisi is.
He proudly announced Sadat
City, which was to be about 90
kilometres northwest of Cairo.
Its aim, like that of the NAC, was to
draw people away from the capital, but
this was to work in factories and farms
rather than to be a seat of government.
It was meant to house half a
million people; today, it’s home to
fewer than 100,000, an industrial
outpost that never really took off.
Then there’s Toshka, a 1990s dream
under Mubarak to divert the Nile
and turn the southern desert into a
“New Valley” with canals and crops.
Billions were spent, but the water never
flowed right, and now it’s a scattering of
half-finished projects baking in the sun.
These weren’t small plans either;
Sadat City got 1.5 billion dollars
in its day, and Toshka is believed
to have swallowed even more.
Both stumbled over funding, poor
planning, and just a lack of people
willing to leave the Nile’s cool embrace.
Yes, the New Administrative Capital
has glossier PR and more money behind
it, but the ghosts of these earlier
failures still linger; desert cities
are easier to announce than to fill.
And there is the other issue that
building a city in the desert is
a constant fight against nature.
Outside the Nile Valley, Egypt gets
less than 20 millilitres of rain a year,
3% of the rainfall you get in London.
Now, I know people always complain about
the rain in the UK, but if you want a
functioning city, some rain is good.
At least you need more
than 20 millilitres a year.
And you certainly do if you have
plans as ambitious as the NAC.
The Green River and those lush parks
need millions of litres every single day,
piped in from the Nile or desalinated
from the Red Sea, both costly options.
In 2024, officials bragged about
a new treatment plant to recycle
wastewater, but it’s nowhere near
enough for 6.5 million people.
Then there’s the sand.
Desert storms carry sand into the
city every day, which not only gets
in the way of construction during
the building phase, but will be a
constant feature of life in the city.
Sure, other cities in the Middle
East have similar issues, whether
that’s Dubai or Riyadh, but these are
also in countries with much deeper
pockets than Egypt’s, much greater
financial resources, thanks to oil.
And, of course, we need to talk
about the cost of all of this.
As you might imagine, it is eye-watering.
It’s officially pegged at 59 billion
dollars, but some estimates suggest
it could climb closer to 100 billion.
The money for it comes from land sales,
property development, and a large
loan from China, but the Egyptian
economy is not in a particularly strong
place to be taking on so much debt.
After increasing Houthi attacks
in the Red Sea last year, revenue
from the Suez Canal dropped by 60%.
Inflation sits at 25.5%, and
Egypt’s foreign debt has climbed
to more than 165 billion dollars.
And this is all in a country where
30% of the population is below
the poverty line, and 50% of the
population makes less than $5 a day.
So, to its critics, this all represents
a massive financial commitment at a time
when ordinary Egyptians are struggling.
It is a luxury for the elite,
disconnected from the needs of the
poor who still crowd Cairo’s slums.
While billions are being poured
into wide boulevards and gleaming
empty skyscrapers, Cairo’s
infrastructure continues to crumble.
This is Sisi’s Egypt, the critics say.
A divided country: the planned,
orderly city for the rich and
powerful, and the chaotic, neglected
metropolis for everyone else.
So what are we to make of all of this?
The New Administrative Capital is
undeniably bold, a statement of
intent etched in glass and steel.
But its vast expense and
strategic design raise questions.
Is it a necessary step to
relieve Cairo’s burden or a
wasteful monument to Sisi’s ego?
Perhaps it’s a bit of both.
Cairo is bursting at the seams,
but this doesn’t stop the NAC from
being a calculated move by Sisi
to ensure his political survival.
And as for whether it ever really
takes off, only time will tell if
this desert city becomes Egypt’s
future or joins the list of grand
projects abandoned to the sands.
OK then, that’s it for today’s episode on
Egypt’s New Administrative Capital, part
two of our mini-series on Modern Egypt.
In part one, in case you missed it, we
talked about the Egyptian Revolution.
And next time, in part three, we’ll
uncover an even darker side of Sisi’s
regime with the murder of Giulio Regeni.
You’ve been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I’m Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I’ll catch you in the next episode.